We loaded every possession that we had in our car in
the smallest little U-Haul trailer that you can
rent and drove to Auburn, Alabama. And we did have
an apartment ready, so we knew where we were going
to rent. So that was a true experience. At that
point, was Pierre Matty, was he kind of a role model
for you as a scholar-scientist? Absolutely. He
was clearly a role model, both as a professional.
He had the professional demeanor, the
professional dress. But he was also a premier
surgeon. And, yeah, he was the role model, no
question. And what did Dean Price say when you
chatted with him? It was very encouraging, and I
had gotten to know Dean Price quite well because I
was president of my class in the veterinary
college, so periodically I met with him for
various issues, and then I was president of the
student body and the American Veterinary Medical
Association student chapter actually got to go to
Portland, Oregon on the same plane with him to the
national meeting of the American Veterinary
Medical Association. So I had gotten to know him
and had been in such leadership roles in the
veterinary college that he was more than just the
dean of the college. By then we had a personal
relationship, and he was very encouraging. All
right, let's stay with him just a second. Both then
and later, describe as much as you can about Al
Price. Al Price was a visionary leader who was able
to make tough decisions and who was, I believe, a
tremendous communicator with the faculty and the
students. And he was a person, you knew where he
stood. You knew what his standards were. And he
implemented some pretty tough changes in going
from the four year to the three year year round.
And he was a role model. And there was no question.
And there was no question who was the dean of the
college. And there was no question but what the
highest standards of character and integrity
would be upheld. And if you didn't uphold those as a
student, you wouldn't be there. And we held the
students and we held ourselves to such an
incredibly high standard. If any student was
caught cheating in the College of Veterinary
Medicine, It was goodbye, and there was no second
chance, and people knew that. And as far as you all
knew, Price was around a lot. You saw him. You saw
him a great deal, absolutely. Never heard
anything negative about him? No, not always. He
was a gentleman, treated students and faculty
with a great respect. And as far as I was aware,
although veterinary medicine numerically, its
student body wasn't large compared to the rest of
it, that his image with the central
administration of the campus was such that
veterinary medicine was certainly treated
equally fairly in every manner. And I think that
was generally felt by the faculty that we
interacted with, and I think it was generally felt
by the veterinary students because there was such
a pride of
being selected to be in the class. And you didn't
want to let anyone down. And there was a standard
there, which I think is really the Aggie code of
honor, that you didn't want to be the one that might
not have upheld
it. When did a veterinary student buy a senior
ring? Well, back then, since there was no
undergraduate degree program per se, after the
second trimester of your second year in
veterinary college, which would be December, you
would be given a baccalaureate degree. It was a BS
in veterinary science. So once you're going
through that process of the two years and then your
first year in when you got the adequate number of
hours you could go get your senior ring and that was
one of the greatest days of my life and I remember
distinctly then you picked them up in Eaton Hall
and I can remember as if it were yesterday of
walking up to the second floor walking up those
stairs and it was on the left when you got to the top
of the stairs walking in there and picking up that
ring and putting it on. Do you remember what it
cost? It was something like $28 or $58. It was small
back then. Do you have any Aggie Ring stories,
anecdotes? Have you ever lost it? I've never lost
it. The only time that I really remember was after I
was at Auburn. My wife and I were going to be
sponsors for a group of veterinary students to go
to Panama City, Florida. And we were leaving, and
she looked at me, and she said, where's your Aggie
Ring? And I said, oh. But I also looked at the other
hand, and my wedding band wasn't there either. And
what had happened was I had done surgery that day,
and when I scrubbed, I'd left them in my clinic
jacket. So we drove all the way back to the small
animal clinic, and I got my Aggie ring and my
wedding band at the same time. Have you ever been at
some unusual place and somebody wrecked it? Oh,
yeah. Where? We went later. My wife and I and our two
daughters, when they were both... up in high
school to Los Angeles and they wanted to go to
Hollywood and the movie studios and some things
there. And I was at the airport at a car rental
agency checking the car in and I look over next to me
and here's this guy filling out his papers with an
Aggie ring. I immediately whip out to him and he was
from Minnesota, now living in Minnesota. So we
whipped out to each other. So it's the calling card
around the world. Describe commencement, vet
school commencement. Vet school commencement
was held in Bryan Civic Auditorium and of course
that was a small group and that seats about 1,500 so
it was adequate size for us and all of our family and
Charlie Scruggs I remember is the who gave the
commencement. You know most of the time you don't
remember who spoke at commencement but I do
remember him. And of course, it was such a special
time because not only had no one in either side of my
family ever gone to college, but here was the first
one now getting a doctor's degree. So special
because not only did you receive the doctoral
role, but they hooded you on stage and then
pronounced you doctor of veterinary medicine.
And I could just look at my mom and dad and just see
them beaming with such pride because my dad had
been offered a scholarship, academic, to A&M, but
World War II caught him. And when he got back, then
he had a wife and me, and he could never financially
go. So it meant so much to him. And it was an
emotional time, it really was. And Kathy, my
wife's family was there. It was a celebration.
About how many of those 64 graduated? I believe
that we ended with 62 out of the 64. Wow. That's
better than usual, isn't it? Oh, yeah. Let's see.
Korean veterans were already gone. They were
gone. Although there were probably a few in our
class that were older and had come back. And
Vietnam was not yet. It was just beginning. It
hadn't produced any. No. I'll tell you something
interesting. We're talking about that time
frame. It's like when I started dating Kathy. for
her to come over from the University of Texas or
when she came up from Corpus, the greatest
challenge was to find a place for her to stay. Of
course, we couldn't afford her to stay in a motel or
hotel. Plus, there were only about three or four in
the whole town. So you know what we did? We found a
friend that we knew, somebody at church.
Or what was good was a number of classmates that
were married. And a lot of times we'd say, hey, you
live out, you've got a house, could she stay over
there? And then when we lived out at Welburn, there
was a girl out there named Alexander, and a lady
probably in her late 70s lived alone, and she let
her stay out there. That's a great challenge, I
think. Yes, it is. If you're going to speak out of
town, what would you do?
The
center pole of this campus. And I believe today. In
fact, I will tell you later.
But that was one.
I'm going to tell you one that's funny. I'm on the
great side.
Oh, yes.
Growing up, that was the campus site. And then
college, most of the time, we would try to take them
to see that part, because that was impressive back
in its day. the facilities today, it's just an
incredible medical facility. All right, now you
got to Auburn in August of 66? That's September
of 66, that's correct. And you were there how long?
I was there almost three years. All right,
describe that. What did you do there? That was an
interesting experience for me because I
graduated on August the 5th, and started work
there August the 15th. And they were short a small
animal surgeon. And here I am supposedly doing
research and doing my graduate work thrown into
the full responsibilities of a faculty member
teaching surgery to fourth year veterinary
students. And many of them had had four years of
undergrad and now they were in their fourth year.
So they had eight years of college And here I'd only
had a total of five. Most of them were older than me.
And I had not done some of the procedures. So I'd go
bone up at night or at noon hour. And man, I was
bummed. I'd just go right in there and do the
surgery. And I was teaching surgery to a lot of them
much older than me. And then taking graduate
classes. The post-doctoral work. was a combined
residency and post-doctoral master's program
with a thesis in research in surgery and
neurophysiology. So through the day, I would be
working full time in the veterinary teaching
hospital and taking graduate courses. And I'm not
sure I would recommend it. That was tough. The
hours were long. And plus, I had emergency duty. So
those were full days. Compare Auburn to College
Station and compare Auburn University to Texas
A&M at that time. Auburn was probably at that time a
comparable sized university because that was
really before the big growth spurt. My last year in
veterinary college was when A&M started its
growth because it admitted women. Auburn was
probably 12,000. and a good university, but it was
clearly not Texas. It struggled with funding, but
later down my academic career, it was good for me to
see the tightening of belts from an
administrative standpoint. The academic
programs there in the veterinary college were
very strong. I don't believe probably the whole
university had the academic statue of an A&M, but
particularly in the area or the discipline that I
was in, it was the number one in the country. And
they had some extremely talented, brilliant
people in those areas. And I followed an Aggie. in
the position that I took, who then went to the
University of Minnesota College of Veterinary
Medicine and has been head of the small animal
department at the University of Georgia now for
20, 30 years. As you made your way into the inner
circle there, how did they treat Aggies? What was
their impression of what they did? They loved
Aggies because they knew Aggies were well trained
and they knew Aggies were hard workers. And
fortunately, I'd had a number of Aggies go through
there before I was there. And quite frankly, I
really believe they would give preference to an
Aggie coming because they knew the kind of
background we had and they knew our work ethic. And
they always joked with us about being from Texas. I
never got into hearing the Aggie joke. of
everything so big in Texas. And I'll never forget
when I told them that I was leaving, that I had
accepted a faculty position back at A&M, one of the
premier small anal orthopedic surgeons told me,
he said, you know, I've always heard that an Aggie
always goes back home to die. Now your wife, did she
do any teaching over there? She taught public
school. Okay.
Was it, were newcomers well accepted in the
community? We were very well accepted. And, you
know, there was a lot of the southern hospitality,
people there. We got very active in our church and
immediately formed friends. We started working
with college kids in our church. And we had a circle
of about five couples, most of whom were either our
age or a little older, and they just took us in and
supported us fully. And then we were so fortunate
in that the department head and his wife almost
took a mentorship responsibility of us young
faculty members, research associates. And I
recall so many times they'd have us in the...
Compared Auburn Southern Baptist to Texas
Southern Baptist? Virtually no difference.
Virtually no difference. And you, all three
years, you're a, over there, you're working on the
Ph.D.? I was for about the first two and a half, and
then I stayed on. They were on a quarter system. I
stayed on for another quarter as assistant
professor before I took a position here in March of
1969.
What significant
skills or attitudes or qualities do you think you
acquired as a result of the Auburn experience?
Well, there was no question but what I learned.
research. I learned how to conduct research.
I had the opportunity to develop surgical skills
simply because of the practice of those that I got
to apply there that really requires that kind of
repetition to do on day in and day out and with the
differences in the cases that you've dealt with.
I'll never forget that we always said, okay, who's
going to hold the record for doing the most spinal
neuro procedures in one week? And when I left, I
held the record. I did 17 one week. So that builds up
because we had referral cases from all over the
southeast. because at that time there were not
veterinary colleges in the other southeastern
states. And many times they drove in there from, we
had cases from Canada even come in there. And so I
gained that kind of experience just of the
surgical skills technique as well as the graduate
courses were rigorous. And I learned so much more
of the in-depth neurophysiology surgery just the
academic arena. I also had the privilege of giving
some lectures and classes, so that gave me some
teaching experience. And I learned a lot of people
skills because when you deal with a clientele and
you deal with the public and you have an emotional
pet in front of you, between you, you're gonna
quickly develop some people skills and
communication skills. Fortunately, I had one of
the very best administrators I have ever seen in my
life as a role model before me. And I watched him
because I had such an interest in leadership,
which I had had since the sixth or seventh grade. So
I was already beginning to think toward the future
of leadership, of administration, and
education. So I watched him, and I learned from
him. And he was like Another administrator that I
worked closely with, he was another one of those
clean desk people, which I am too. When I walk out of
my office in an afternoon, there won't be a single
piece of paper on that desk. And there wasn't when I
was provost or president of this university. I
handled them. Now the Auburn Vet School in its size
complexity was similar to the one here? Yes,
almost identical in size. And it had students from
a number of the southeastern states? It had
students from seven different states. Under
contract? Under contract. And I think they were
taking, by that time, about 80 students. We had
students from Florida, Alabama, Mississippi,
Louisiana, Kentucky, and Tennessee as a diverse
group. In terms of student quality? Extremely
high. It was comparable to here. Because a lot of
those, since they took from seven states, those
seven states could only send a contractual
number. Boy, those kids were really selected out.
They were cream of the crop. I know nothing about
this and we don't need to spend much time on it, but I
used to wonder about what the political realities
might have been in the selection of that very
minute number from various states, what strings
may have been pulled or someone tried to pull to
ensure that And they often tried to pull strings.
They even get governor's offices in those states.
That's what I would guess. The university was a lot
like A&M. The student had to stand up on their own
merit. And so how did you find out about the
possibility of a return slot here? Well, that's
interesting because even when I had left A&M, I had
talked to the people in medicine and surgery. They
knew what I was going to be doing.
going on for post-doctoral work. So they were .
I knew that they did not have anyone here in the
specialty of neurosurgery, and they desperately
needed it. So about the time that I had finished all
my post-doctoral work, I get a call from the head of
medicine and surgery here. indicating that they
were going to have a position as an assistant
professor opening up. And would I be interested?
Well, with families and this being my alma mater,
being an Aggie, they didn't even need to ask me. I
was very quick to say, I want to come back. And they
said, we want you to come back. We will let you take
this whole area of neurosurgery and develop it as a
new specialty within the hospital, within the
curriculum. So what more could a young person at my
age want than to be able to come back here and
develop that specialty? So we made the decision in
December of 68. So no search committee, no
national ads. Not that I'm aware of. I think the
department head and the dean's office. Who was the
department head then? Mr. Callahan, Dr.
Callahan. Nick. Nick Callahan. And I'll never
forget this. We came by to finalize things with
them. And we started looking for a house. And we
looked over on Mary Oaks and found a home that we
loved, but it would stretch us financially, and we
knew it. But it was not yet completed. The inside
was not. But we went ahead and signed a contract.
And my wife selected everything in that home in one
day. And we left. We never saw that home again until
we drove up with a U-Haul truck and unloaded in
March of 69. Oh, my. And it was beautiful. Oh, how
good, how good. Not going to ask dollars anymore
after this. What was the beginning salary?
I believe it was somewhere around $24,000.
And did anybody give you any guidelines at all
other than what you just mentioned about what your
responsibilities were? You were to develop a new
area. I was to develop a new area. I was given a job
description of what a faculty member's
responsibilities would be in the small animal
medicine and surgery department. I knew what
having already almost three years in the academic
arena I knew what the tenure requirements would be
I purposely put in that I wanted to do some
additional kinds of research and I knew I would be
teaching that specialty both in the clinic with a
group of students as well as in the lecture room
And that I would have some student
responsibilities of counseling students as they
would come to me.
And so you began then in the fall of? The spring,
March of 1969. 69. They were still on three year?
Yes. Still on? Yes. Did you turn to anyone for any
particular advice early in the?
I don't recall any specific person that I went to
for counsel or advice. I knew a fair number of them
because I had had some of them when I was a student as
a faculty member.
I knew the department head, I knew Dr. Callahan, I
knew Dr. Ellett who was head of the small animal
component of it at that time. And I know that I
periodically would go to them for certain things.
But remarkably back then, you were pretty well
given your job description and you were turned
loose. And I looked at it as a great advantage. I
mean, here it is, go with it. Were there any perhaps
amusing incidents of where someone spoke to you as
if you were still a student, forgot that you were
now their colleague? No, I never had that. That
never happened? I really didn't and that was very
assuring so many times because I was really looked
at as a colleague Sometimes I would go to like Dr.
Jean Gowing in medicine if I had a complicated case
that the surgical component was now complicated
because of a medical issue and I would frequently
go to them for medical consultation because I knew
that they were older and sage and wisdom of knowing
those things so they were always there for me but
They treated me as a real peer and as a real
colleague. Now, the department at that time,
about how many colleagues? Oh, that was a big
department. I think we probably had at least about
40 people then. And as far as you were aware, where
did Texas A&M Veterinary Medicine in general and
in that specialty look? Where did Texas A&M and
small animal medicine, where did it win? It would
have been in the top five. There's no question when
you go to national meetings that you would be part
of it. Texas A&M, you were one of the top five. Who
were the other top? Cornell, University of
California, Davis, University of Pennsylvania,
Maybe Ohio State at times. They had a few
weaknesses in it, but they were considered one of
the better ones too. And the facilities you were
provided and the staff you were given, were they
adequate? Yes, we had good facilities. We had good
staff. We had good staff support.
And of course, we were growing rapidly. The
Veterinary Teaching Hospital, because of the
specialist because ophthalmology was off the
ground, orthopedics, dermatology, all of the
specialties were just booming. And we were almost
marginal in the surgery area because of the
caseload and the referral cases that were
beginning to come here. But, you know, we were
pleased. They were excellent. The surgery...
cases in general, what were they? Where did they
come from? They came from all over the state of
Texas. I had cases flown in here from West Texas. I
had one flown in, I'll never forget this, from some
people that actually were from I think Abilene or
somewhere in that area that are the owners of the
big apple orchard out in the state of Washington. I
mean, they ship all over the world. It's a famous
name, and I'm sorry I can't think of it right now.
But we met them at the airport, and they had a poodle
that was paralyzed from a herniated disc, and that
was my specialty. And we met them at the airport,
brought them over to the clinic, told them what we
could do, and told them I thought that I could...